<article>
	<pid>457558</pid>
	<title>Daily Kos: The Lost Sarcophagus of Mycerinus</title>
	<url>http://www.dailykos.com/story/2011/06/09/457558/-The-Lost-Sarcophagus-of-Mycerinus</url>
	<date>Thu Jun 09, 2011 at 11:04 AM PDT</date>
	<author>niccolo caldararo</author>
	<text>  &nbsp; &nbsp;I thought since there is renewed interest in the discovery of the lost sarcophagus of the Egyptian pharaoh Mycerinus it would be appropriate to provide a bit a background in a very obscure fashion, since, of course, the sarcophagus is lost and is associated with a number of opaque events. &nbsp;Search for the lost sarcophagus, last seen strapped to the deck of a British cruiser sinking in the Mediterranean near the Pillars of Hercules, is to be conducted by the use of the same submarine that discovered the Titanic (http://egyptologynewsnetwork.blogspot.com/...). &nbsp; &nbsp; The work of conservators is fraught with difficulties and potential health hazards. Aside from the stress of constant deadlines, there also exists the dangers lurking in the hidden histories of artifacts, some real and some, perhaps imagined. One incident in the history of conservation illustrates this point. &nbsp;It involved the lost sarcophagus.    INTRODUCTION &nbsp; &nbsp; The identiﬁcation of the third pyramid at Gizeh with the Pharaoh Mycerinus was made by both Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus In the first century B.C. This was not veriﬁed until Howard-Vyse found the name “Mycerinus" written in red ochre on the roof of the burial chamber in 183?-1838. Added to this was information gleaned from the joint expedition of Harvard University and the Boston Museum of Fine Arts which excavated the site under the direction of G. A. Reisner between 1905 and 1922. &nbsp; &nbsp; Mycerinus had broken the curse that Egypt should suffer 150 years under the rule of wicked kings by being pious and just. As a result of this, he was doomed to live only six years by an oracle and though his actual reign was 18 years, he died suddenly without completing his pyramid. While there is evidence of other entries to his tomb mystery shrouded the reported excavations. &nbsp; During their excavation, Howard-Vyse and Perring were constantly plagued with mishaps and accidents. The beautiful sarcophagus, carved in basalt with an elaborately worked outer panel, was lost when the ship carrying it foundered off the coast of Spain on the way to England (Howard-Vyse I840-1842). The tomb showed evidence that it had been entered by Saite restorers (663 - 525 B.C.) , who had entered the tomb probably after authorities noted it had been disturbed. Howard-Vyse and Perring had found a lid to a carved anthropoid wooden coffin inscribed with the name of Mycerinus in the original burial chamber with some human bones. The lid was believed to date from the Saite period (Edwards, 1947). &nbsp; &nbsp; There is evidence that Mycerinus met an untimely death and the situation in regards to the original design and contents of the burial chamber is confused both by the activities of those who disturbed the chamber after it was closed and in the assumption that it was finished quickly due to Mycerinus's death. &nbsp;However, added to this, and the complexities for the archaeologists, is the question of the work of the Saite restorers according to Borchardt who was actively excavating at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th, though Edwards discounts some of his speculations. &nbsp; &nbsp;After the excavations led by Reisner (1931) for Harvard and the Museum of Fine Arts of Boston, a considerable amount of artifacts from the site was taken to the United States tor study. This group of objects had been preceded by the collection formed at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. This collection had been excavated by A.C. Mace (1921, 1922) at the tomb of Senebtisi at Lisht. When the Senebtisi material reached the museum, a chemist, Arthur I. Kopp, was given responsibility to examine the objects and conduct materials analysis. cleaning, and technical study (Aldred 1978; Howe 1941). Kopp worked on Egyptian objects from other excavations [Judith Hanson, personal communication 1993), and objects entering the collections from other sources (Fink and Kopp 1933}. But his work on these Egyptian artifacts would form one of the most mysterious and yet tragic events in the history of conservation. THE LABORATORY Arthur H. Kopp was a chemist, and as Kate C. Lefferts (Conservator of Objects, Metropolitan Museum of Art, personal communication 1993) has remarked, “Kopp‘s records were impeccable and he did a great deal of pioneer work.“ In 1932 he had set up a laboratory at the Metropolitan Museum of Art to aid the curators in the investigation of artifacts and to provide conservation services. Kopp was a careful and well-organized man. He had treated objects from the Greek and Roman Department collections as well as the Egyptian materials (Arnold, Department of Objects Conservation, Metropolitan Museum of Art, personal communication 1993). &nbsp; &nbsp; Colin Fink and Kopp worked at times together at the Met, as laboratory notebooks prove (Metropolitan Notebooks I932}. Fink and Kopp rediscovered the ancient Egyptian craft of antimony plating and unraveled other secrets in their work from the mass of artifacts they treated (Fink and Kopp I933). The objects analyzed and treated, however, were not always from the collection of the Metropolitan, some came from other institutions and private collections. for example. Columbia University (Metropolitan Notebooks 1931). The records of Kopp's work show that he was in contact with other chemists in laboratories working on similar problems and that he followed the available literature for restoration techniques. He reports using Scott‘s (1926) method for treating corrosion products on bronze in an effort to clean a small Egyptian water pitcher to disclose any inscriptions on it. Kopp was tireless in his efforts to provide useﬁll information for the curators, and his careful notes, drawings and chemical skills established his work as both valuable and surprising in its completeness and success. For the most part, however, Kopp‘s contributions have seldom been mentioned in print for his contributions, (for example, Farnsworth 1940; but not in Byers I962; Caldararo 1987; Gilberg 1988). Let us focus on some of his work and study his methods. Nine Amulets Kopp utilized electrolytic methods for treating corrosion on nine amulets which he identiﬁes by means of speciﬁc gravity as a silverfgold alloy with an estimate of the alloy constituents (Metropolitan Museum of Art chemical reports l!l0!36:2). This method, as Goffer (1980) notes, was well-known to chemists before the invention of more precise instrumentation (Baer and Low I982). Kopp is puzzled by the greater degree of corrosion in Your of the amulets. He reports on treating live of the nine by electrolytic methods resulting in a change in specific gravities. His results are as follows: Speciﬁc Gravities of Amulets (arbitrarily numbered) Values given before and after electrolytic treatment Metallic: appeared obviously metallic and only tarnished Corroded: unclear of metallic nature due to heavy corrosion Metallic Corroded l. &nbsp; ll.l &nbsp; — &nbsp;10.8 6. 5.4 2. 10.’? — 10.8 7. T6 3. 9.6 &nbsp;— 10.6 8. 6.3 4. 9.9 &nbsp;— 10.8 9. 6.1 5. l0.6 &nbsp;— 10.8 &nbsp; &nbsp; He experimented with one of the four highly corroded amulets, but the results are far from satisfactory. The electrolytic treatment loosens the outer crust of corrosion, showing a weak, porous core which exhibits some engraved lines and general shape of the well preserved atnulets. Chemical analysis of a fragment of the core (1 x 1 x 1.5 mm piece) mixed with the crusts removed in treatment resulted inthe following Table l. TABLE 1: ANALYSIS OF AMULET #6 Core Fragment Crust Silver . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66.0% . . . . . . . . . . 93.2% Gold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31.9% . . . . . . . . . . 2.7% Copper . . . . . . . . . . . . Trace . . . . . . . . . . Trace Iron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Trace . . . . . . . . . . — Balance — Chlorine,...... etc Bal. . . . . . . . . . . ..... Bal &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;By computing the ratio of the core to crust in mass as a relationship of the design, Kopp estimates that the original composition ofthe amulet was 80.7% silver and 19.3% gold. He ﬁnds that the uncorroded amulets gold content was 3.4% and that the higher gold content in #6 is the result of the corrosion process to a greater extent due to the presence of salt resulting in an electrochemical cell sacriﬁcing the silver, while the higher silver content alloy is protected by the formation of silver chloride. Of course, observations of the survival of articles of silver as silver chloride had been reported by Scott (1926) and Lucas (1932), though Lucas mentions that electrum is protected by a ﬁlm formation of silver chloride. &nbsp; &nbsp; This is the idea expressed by Kopp and he makes reference to similar protective ﬁlms in aluminum. &nbsp;He recommends no further treatment. But this is only the ﬁrst of a string of unsolved mysteries which are to plague Kopp until, drawn into a vortex of accidental mishaps like l-Ioward-Vysc, Perring, and Bochardt, he faces a ﬁnal challenge that will prove a match for all his preparation. Beads from Necklaces &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;Mr. Winlock, a Museum ofﬁcial, presented Kopp with a number of partially disintegrated brown beads. These beads had a rather prosaic character, yet should look like faience given the chemical analysis of a fragment: Chemical analysis of object 08.20030 Silica (SiO2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93.?8% Volatile and combustible matter . . . . 2.39% Sodium oxide (Na2O . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.59% Potassium oxide (K30) . . . . . . . . . . 0.?1% Calcium oxide (CaO) . . . . . . . . . . . 0.'?4% Aluminum oxide (A1303) . . . . . . . . . 0.25% Iron oxide (Fe3O3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.15% Copper oxide (Cu()) . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.18% &nbsp; &nbsp; Aldred (1978) outlines the evolution of Egyptian products used as beads and their tremendous production ofthem and common use. Kopp notes that under microscopic examination he found “... a large proportion of relatively coarse grains of silica, unlike sound faience which has a ﬁne structure." Of course, we know much more now since Sir Flinders Petrie ﬁrst characterized evidence of Egyptian glass manufacture (Nicholson l993), and our experience with different types of degradation from manufacturing differences and variations in preservation context (Smith 1996). Kopp’s use of the microscope and chemical analysis was of great interest to curators and archaeologists for the unique observations and ﬁndings that resulted. For example, in the case of the gold wire circlet of Senebtisi where he demonstrated that the wire had been cut from a sheet and then drawn. &nbsp; &nbsp; He was opening vistas of knowledge on the secrets of manufacture of Egyptian art by his skill and diligence. The Reward of Virtue &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;Oﬁen in the career of a conservator the routine activities which characterize the work of most individuals is overshadowed by one unique event. A saying of considerable age among collectors is that a conservator is only as good as their last work. This attitude reﬂects to some degree the fashion associated with an in general, but also something about how the performance and regard of a person is built and diminished or enhanced over time. With some of us a long career ends uneventfully with a happy retirement. With many, sadly an increasing number, a career is interrupted by a savage illness which ruins a life constructed upon a striving toward perfection in skills. One descends into a steady loss of ability to a restricted retirement or death. For a remarkable few, work continues after retirement in an almost seamless transition while respect builds and one‘s presence is regarded as a fortunate boon for all. &nbsp; &nbsp; For Arthur H. Kopp none of these endings was to mark his demise, instead he was met with so horrible an end that no conservator could imagine such a possibility. We all prepare tor the unexpected accident in a laboratory. Safety procedures are developed. Safety equipment is conveniently located in the laboratory and routine drills are performed. Risk is managed in the context of what is known in the ﬁeld. For Kopp to have prepared for his undoing would have required a visit to a remarkable event of divination. Kopp was a scrupulous worker, his laboratory the image of cleanliness and order. His records were “impeccable” as Kate Lefferts recalls. Information about his last day are sketchy at best. We know that he was asked by the curators to boil and prepare varnish the night before an exhibition was to open. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;Lefferts states she was told he had “blown himself up". And we know from oral history data at the University of Delaware that it happened sometime in the early 1940s. But there is more. Apparently another version has the varnish catching ﬁre, surprising Kopp who goes about a methodical attempt to put it out. But then, as in other mysterious cases, a coincidence of forces gathers to doom his efforts. Like the spirit of Mycerinus drawing winds across the deserts of Africa to engulf the ship carrying his sarcophagus off Spain almost exactly I00 years before, an apparition of accident sweeps into Kopp"s signally ordered universe. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; As the room ﬁlled with smoke and ﬁre, attendants and other museum staff rushed to the laboratory to aid the ensnared Kopp. Kopp, exhausted and badly burned in an increasingly futile effort to stern the disaster, flees from the stove and lunges to the doors to the corridor. At exactly the same time those out side reach the door and attempt to force it open. Both sides ﬁiriously ram the wooden barrier, screaming encouragement to each other until Kopp is overcome and yet the door fails to open his body wedged against it and the floor and ﬁrrniture. Finally with a crash the door fails and the rescuers are thrown back by the heat of the fire and the oppression of the smoke. Coughing and singed. their clothes smoldering in the ﬂames they soak them selves with water and attempt to beat a protective circle around the fallen body of Arthur Kopp. They drag his burned and disﬁgured corpse from the room, only to acknowledge that the sands of Egypt have claimed another victim for releasing her secrets. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;Perhaps it did not happen exactly this way, and it may be that this little story would be more appropriate for the pages of Studies in Failures in Conservation. But Kopp was not a failure, rather an example of the mass of conservators who are seldom acknowledged for their painstaking work, who despite all pressures to do the impossible and attempt the improbable, soldier on against all odds for poor pay in darkened corners of impressive ediﬁces ﬁlled with the treasures of our imperium. Like Kopp accident can come to any of us as well. We are not immune to error and in an instant the unlikely perfection ofa lifetime of devoted labor, bought by the sacriﬁce to an internal code of ethics that demands more blood and tears than any institutional one, in only one instant, it can all evaporate without a trace. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;My thanks to Kate Lefferts and Joyce Hill Stoner for their help in providing information on Mr. Kopp. Also I owe a debt of gratitude to the Metropolitan Museum of Art and especially Ms. Judith Hanson. for providing me with Arthur Kopp's original reports and other information about his lite and work. While I acknowledge these sources they are in no way responsible for the unfortunate way I have twisted them into this modern tale of woe. REFERENCES CITED Aldred, C. 1978 Jewels of the Pharaohs. Ballantine Books, New York. Baer, N. S. and M. J. D. Low I982 Advances in Scientiﬁc Instrumentation for Conservation: An Overview. In Science and Technology in the Service Conservation, Preprints of the Contributions to the Washington Congress, 3-9 September I982. edited by N.S. Bromrnelle and Garry Thomson, pp. I-4. International Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works, London. Byers, D. S. I962 The Restoration and Preservation of Some Objects from Etowah. American Antiquity, 28(2):206-216. Caldararo, N. 1987 An Outline History of Conservation in Archaeology and Anthropology as Presented Through it Publications. Journal of the American Institute for Conservation, 26:8-IO. Edwards, I. E. S. I947 The Pyramids Egypt. Pelican Books. Aylesbury. Farnsworth. Marie 1940 The Use of Sodium Metaphosphate in Cleaning Bronzes. Technical Studies in the Field of Fine Arts, 9(l):2I-23. Fink, C. G. and A. H. Kopp 1933 Ancient Egyptian Antimony Plating on Copper Objects. Metropolitan Museum Studies 4:163-I67. Gilberg, M. 1938 The History oi‘ Bronze Disease and its Treatment. In Early Advances in Conservation, edited by V. Daniels. British Museum Occasional Paper 65:59-70. Goffer, Zvi I980 Archaeological Chemistry A Sourcebook on the Applications of Chemistry to Archaeology, Wiley and Sons, NY. Howard-Vyse. R. W. H. 1840-1842 Operations Carried on at the Pyramids of Gizeh in I837, With reference to &nbsp;an Account of a Voyage into Upper Egypt, with an Appendix. J. Fraser, London. Howe, W. A. I941 A History of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, The Trustees of the Museum, NY. Lucas. A. I932 Antiquities, their Restoration and Preservation, 2"“ edition. Edward Arnold. &amp; Co., London. Mace. A. C. I921 Excavations at Lisht. The Bulletin of the Metropolitan Museum 0f Art, November, Part 2. pp. 5-I9. 1922 Excavations at Lisht. The Bulletin of the Metropolitan Museum Qf Art. December, Part 3 PP- 4-13, Notebooks, &nbsp;Metropolitan Museum of Art, l93l Notebooks, Metropolitan Museum of Art 1932 -Nicholson, P. T, &nbsp;Recent Excavations at an Ancient Egyptian Glassworks: Tell el-Amarna. 1993. Glass-Technology 36(4): l 25-128. Reisner, G.A., Mycerinus, The Temples of the Third Pyramid at Giza, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 1931 Scott, Alexander 1926, The Cleaning and Restoration of Museum Exhibits, His Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce, London. Smith, S. M. 1996, The Manufacture and Conservation of Egyptian Faience. ln Preprints of the 11Triennial Meeting. Edinburgh. Scotland. 1-6 September 1996. edited by Janet Bridgland, pp 845-850, James and James, London. Originally published in Journal of Mid Atlantic Archaeology, v. 21, 2005:41-46. </text>
	<score>1</score>
</article>
<comment>
	<cid>41919876</cid>
	<title>Tip Jar</title>
	<date>Thu Jun 09, 2011 at 11:04:02 AM PDT</date>
	<author>niccolo caldararo</author>
	<text>Tip Jar</text>
	<score>1</score>
	<parent>None</parent>
</comment>
